---
title: "Lack of CD8+ T cell effector differentiation during priming mediates checkpoint blockade resistance in non–small cell lung cancer"
collection: publications
permalink:	/publications/2021-10-29_kp.md
excerpt: 
date: 2021-10-29
venue: 'Science Immunology'
paperurl: 'https://doi.org/10.1126/sciimmunol.abi8800'
citation: 'Horton, B. L., <b>Morgan, D. M.</b>, Momin, N., Zagorulya, M., Torres-Meija, E., Bhandakar, V., Wittrup, K. D., Love, J. C., Spranger, S. (2021). &quot;Lack of CD8+ T cell effector differentiation during priming mediates checkpoint blockade resistance in non–small cell lung cancer.&quot; <i>Science Immunology </i>. <b> 6 </b> abi8800 (2021).'
---
In non–small cell lung cancer (NSCLC), response to immune checkpoint blockade (ICB) is associated with pro-grammed cell death ligand 1 expression that is induced by interferon-g–producing, tumor-infiltrating CD8+ T cells. However, not all tumors with a CD8+ T cell infiltrate respond to ICB, and little is known about the mechanisms governing ICB resistance in T cell–infiltrated NSCLC. We used an orthotopic NSCLC mouse model to study ICB- refractory CD8+ T cell responses. Single-cell RNA sequencing of the NSCLC mouse tumors revealed that lung cancer– specific tumor-infiltrating CD8+ T cells exhibited clonal expansion but lacked expression of genes associated with effector and exhausted T cell responses, indicating that they underwent a differentiation program distinct from conventional T cell exhaustion. This lung cancer–specific T cell dysfunction program was established early during priming in the mediastinal lymph node and was characterized by robust proliferation but a failed up-regulation of effector and exhausted T cell characteristics. Intriguingly, CD8+ T cells from patients with NSCLC expressed an analogous gene expression program, which appeared distinct from conventional T cell exhaustion. Administra-tion of recombinant interleukin-2 (IL-2) and IL-12 was sufficient to restore effector T cell differentiation and induce control of KP lung tumors. These findings imply that a CD8+ T cell differentiation trajectory, activated during T cell priming in the mediastinal lymph node, limits the response of CD8+ T cells to ICB and thereby may contribute to failure of ICB in a subset T cell–infiltrated NSCLC.

[Download paper here](http://duncanmorgan.github.io/files/sciimmunol.abi8800.pdf)
